---
layout: post
title: Getting started
---

## getting started
It's the first week of the biohackacademy and I'm pretty excited to get started! First things first even before properly introducing ourselves we are diving head first into the biosafety instructions. 


## biosafety instructions
by Per Staugaard (biosafety officer) - 28 feb 2022

Labs can be risky places and therefore there are mearsures and safety procedures to protect the enviroment, animals (people included) from microorganisms, genetically modified organisms, and toxins.


### Risk groups
Biological agents belong to a specific risk group - 1 being the safest and 4 being possibly deadly. In our lab we can only use class 1.

I asked an AI to write a short poem  to help me remember.

` Risk group one, no harm is done,`
` In group two, illness can come through,`
` Group three brings disease, but we have some ease,`
` Group four, be careful or you'll be no more.`

**class 1:** not likely to cause decease in humans

**class 2:** make you ill but not seriously (can be treated or vaccinated)

**class 3:** severe decease and may present risk to community - usually treatment available

**class 4:** causes deadly illnesses and is transmittable

To find out the class a agent is you can check the World Health Organization (WHO) publication "Laboratory biosafety manual". There are slight differences between different countries. 

In class 3 labs you may see measures and procedures like the following:
Primary containment of agents in the lab, bottles, cabinet, etc. Secondary containment includes hepa filters for air going out, negative preasure within the lab, autoclaving for things going outside, airlocks for people. And procedures  like restrictred entry, training/qualifications, PPE (coat, gloves, respirator, glasses) and medical checks/vaccination.


## Safe techniques
* keep doors and windows closed
* clean surfaces
* no jewelry
* tie up hair, no phones, no food
* short nails
* no contact between hands and face
* qualified staff
* lab coat
* kill anything you grow
* etc.
* labeling agents with content, date and name


### waste disposal & cleaning
* Think ahead - there is a seperate bin bin for infecive material that will be boiled or autoclaved before leaving the lab.
* Kill active agents with with 10% bleech by incubating for 20 min to 16hrs before disposal.
* Clean surface with 70% ethanol.
* Autoclave for 20 minutes.
* Don't make bombs by mixing waste.


### @Waag
At Waag the lab is ML1 certified wich means we can work with risk group 1 agents. The bio safety officer is Per Staugaard



